modules/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown-procedure.adoc, before:

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown.adoc
//

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown-procedure_{context}"]
= Adding an out-of-service taint manually for automatic volume detachment

.Prerequisites

* Access to the cluster with cluster-admin privileges.

.Procedure

To allow volumes to detach automatically from a node after a non-graceful node shutdown:

. After a node is detected as unhealthy, shut down the worker node.

. Ensure that the node is shutdown by running the following command and checking the status:
+
[source, terminal]
----
oc get node <node name> <1>
----
<1> <node name> = name of the non-gracefully shutdown node

. Taint the corresponding node object by running the following command:
+
[source, terminal]
----
oc adm taint node <node name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute <1>
----
<1> <node name> = name of the non-gracefully shutdown node
+
After the taint is applied, the volumes detach from the shutdown node allowing their disks to be attached to a different node.
+
.Example
+
The resulting YAML file resembles the following:
+
[source, yaml]
----
spec:
  taints:
  - effect: NoExecute
    key: node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service
    value: nodeshutdown
----

. Restart the node.

. Remove the taint.

Commit message:

Add note about ensuring node is shutdown

modules/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown-procedure.adoc, after:

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown.adoc
//

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown-procedure_{context}"]
= Adding an out-of-service taint manually for automatic volume detachment

.Prerequisites

* Access to the cluster with cluster-admin privileges.

.Procedure

To allow volumes to detach automatically from a node after a non-graceful node shutdown:

. After a node is detected as unhealthy, shut down the worker node.

. Ensure that the node is shutdown by running the following command and checking the status:
+
[source, terminal]
----
oc get node <node name> <1>
----
<1> <node name> = name of the non-gracefully shutdown node

[IMPORTANT]
====
If the node has not been completely shut down, do not proceed and tain the node. Should the node still be up and the taint applied, then filesystem corruption can occur.
====

. Taint the corresponding node object by running the following command:
+
[source, terminal]
----
oc adm taint node <node name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute <1>
----
<1> <node name> = name of the non-gracefully shutdown node
+
After the taint is applied, the volumes detach from the shutdown node allowing their disks to be attached to a different node.
+
.Example
+
The resulting YAML file resembles the following:
+
[source, yaml]
----
spec:
  taints:
  - effect: NoExecute
    key: node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service
    value: nodeshutdown
----

. Restart the node.

. Remove the taint.
